# Comparative Analysis of statistical and machine learning methods for air quality forecasting

**Abstract** — Air pollution is the ever-growing concern of the modern society because of increased industrialization and a growth in the demand of tangible products such as electronics and automobiles. Usually, industrial processes which manufacture such products pollute the ambient air via harmful gases and by-products. Sometimes, air pollution is the cause of loosely implemented environmental regulations at manufacturing yards. Air pollution is the preliminary reason for several respiratory diseases. This study, however, focuses on the forecasting of such pollutant’s concentration, especially the PM2.5 pollutant, in ambient air which can be used by governmental bodies to take needful decisions in favor of social interest. We conduct our study around the air quality data which is collected from two major metropolis of India: Delhi and Mumbai. We leverage our study on univariate time series forecasting and compare both traditional statistical methods and machine learning algorithms based on their performance in both short- and long-term predictions. Later, we benchmark our work on Urban Air Quality dataset that contains multivariate air quality data from several air monitoring systems in China. We show that machine learning model such as Random Forest Regressor will provide significantly reduced error rate for univariate time series forecasting as compared to statistical methods and certain deep learning models studied in literature.
